---
layout: post
title: Release 0.14.0
---

We have just released MDAnalysis version 0.14.0. This release contains a large
number of new features and bug fixes. The highlights are listed below but for
more details see the
[release notes](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/wiki/ReleaseNotes0140).

# Upgrade

You can upgrade with `pip install --upgrade MDAnalysis`

# Noticable Changes

## Implicit OR in selections

Many long selection strings used in select_atoms have been simplified through
allowing implicit *OR* in the arguments.  For example to select all atoms
with one of a few names previous required lots of ORs

```python
# OLD
u.select_atoms('name Ca or name N or name Ch')

# NEW
u.select_atoms('name Ca N Ch')
```

The new syntax allows multiple arguments after the keyword `name`.
The selection will keep eating arguments till it hits a keyword.
The use of wildcards is still possible too, making the selection
of all atoms with a type beginning with 'C' or 'N' as simple as:

```python
u.select_atoms('type C* N*')
```

Similarly, for selecting ranges of resids

```python
# OLD
u.select_atoms('resid 1:10 or resid 40:50 or resid 56 or resid 67')

# NEW
u.select_atoms('resid 1:10 40:50 56 67')
```

This new behaviour works for *name, type, resname, segid, altLoc, resid,
resnum and bynum* selections!  The old behaviour will still work,
but we feel this should save a lot of typing!

## Boolean indexing of trajectories
You can now treat trajectories like numpy arrays in a fully pythonic fashion:
You can do fancy indexing and now you can also do boolean indexing, allowing
building simple re-usable trajectory filters with ease, e.g., in order to slice
data.

```python
# build a filter array for re-use: only frames where the centroids
# of groups A and B are closer than 3 A
idx = [np.linalg.norm(A.centroid() - B.centroid()) < 3.0 for ts in u.trajectory]

for ts in u.trajectory[idx]:
   # do more analysis on these frames

for ts in u.trajectory[np.logical_not(idx)]:
   # do analysis on the other frames
```

## New analysis module to calculate linear densities
The
[MDAnalysis.analysis.lineardensity](http://pythonhosted.org/MDAnalysis/documentation_pages/analysis/lineardensity.html)
module contains the class `LinearDensity` that simplifies calculation of mass
and charge densities profiles along the primary axes of a simulation cell.

## Rewrite of TRR and XTC file handling

Our wrapper of the Gromacs library
[xdrlib](http://www.gromacs.org/Developer_Zone/Programming_Guide/XTC_Library)
has been completely rewritten in cython. This changes brings us one
step closer towards supporting Python 3. The only user facing API change is that
we don't save persistent frame offsets with the pickle module anymore but
with numpy's 'npz' format. This improves reopening of xtc/trr files.

## Experimental Python 3 Support

With this release it is possible to run MDAnalysis under python 3. We have
ported most of our coordinate readers, DCD is still missing, and topology
readers to be python2/3 compatible. Most features should already work but expect
there to be some minor glitches.

## Others

This release contains other performance enhancements and fixes. For a detailed
list see the [release notes](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/wiki/ReleaseNotes0140).
