---
layout: post
title: Our Code of Conduct
---


Dear MDAnalysis Community,

We feel the MDAnalysis community is a happy one, and we hope all members
feel the same. As the community grows we want it to stay as welcoming.
In that spirit, MDAnalysis has adopted a
[Code of Conduct]({{site.baseurl}}pages/conduct/) (CoC) to make
explicit that we as a community value *all* our present and future
members and embrace our diversity. We are committed to providing a
productive, harassment-free environment for everyone

Please read the full text at
[http://mdanalysis.org/pages/conduct/]({{site.baseurl}}pages/conduct/).

All core developers absolutely stand behind the CoC and are fully
committed to ensuring and enforcing that *everyone* (founders,
developers, anyone communicating on the lists or on GitHub, ...)
respects each other as outlined in the CoC.

But it's not only core developers who are responsible for making our's
an inclusive community in which everyone feels they can productively
participate. It actually need to be *all of us*. A community is based on
the interactions of individuals and the sum of their values defines
their community. The CoC means that everyone in MDAnalysis agrees to
share a common set of core values and, importantly, to act according
to these values in all interactions in our community.

If you feel you suffered from harassment or intimidation or were made
feel uncomfortable then please speak up: the CoC has links to
[communicate safely]({{site.baseurl}}pages/conduct/#reporting) with a
subset of the core developers who have taken on the responsibility to
follow up on CoC violations. If you observe that someone else is being
harassed please speak up – during the incident, if possible, or
through the above channels.

Establishing the CoC was not prompted by any incident. Rather, the
core developers recognized that the best time to make explicit the
rules and values of our community is simply a good idea, and we follow
many of the major open source projects such as Django and Jupyter
(from which we heavily borrowed – [thank you]({{site.baseurl}}pages/conduct/#acknowledgment)!).

— [@MDAnalysis/coredevs](https://github.com/orgs/MDAnalysis/teams/coredevs)
