---
layout: post
title: Release 0.19.0
---

A new version of MDAnalysis has been released!
This version brings a multitude of new features
including exciting additions from the two Google Summer of Code students.
Some highlights are given below, whilst
the [release notes][] list all the changes in this version.

## Capped Distance Searches

Our first GSoC student, Ayush Suhane, worked on integrating faster distance search algorithms
for limited distance searches.
This resulted in two new functions `MDAnalysis.lib.distances.capped_distance` and
`MDAnalysis.lib.distances.self_capped_distance`, which find all pairwise distances between
particles up to a given maximum distance.
By specifying a maximum distance to the search, it is possible to optimise the search,
leading to greatly improved performance especially in larger systems.

For example to find all contacts between oxygen and hydrogen up to 5.0 Angstroms: # TODO, get that stupid symbol
```python
from MDAnalysisTests.datafiles import PSF, DCD
import MDAnalysis as mda
from MDAnalysis.lib.distances import capped_distance

u = mda.Universe(PSF, DCD)

oxy = u.select_atoms('name O*')
hyd = u.select_atoms('name H*')

idx, dists = capped_distance(oxy.positions, hyd.positions, box=u.dimensions, max_cutoff=5.0)
```
Unlike `distance_array` which returns a matrix of every pairwise distance,
here a sparse representation is returned,
where `idx` is a (n, 2) array of the indices of the atoms
and `dists` is the distance between these atoms.

For full details on the implementation of this and the expected performance improvements
see Ayush's blog here: TODO: link to ayush's blog post on this

## On the fly trajectory transformations

Our second GSoC student

link to davides' blog post on this

## Analysis improvements

- nsf dihedral work
- density flexibility
- rdf_s

## Improvements to file readers

- lammps dump reader
- chainreader
- traj slice object
- memory reader
- hybrid36 pdb
- settle constraints
- top parser does bonds/angles/dihedrals


## Miscellaneous performance improvements

- guess_bonds (thanks to above methods)
- geometry selections faster (thanks to above)
- make_whole (cpp rewrite)
- fragment finding (cpp rewrite)
- improvements to AtomGroup internals

## Deprecations

This release brings a few new deprecations as the package heads towards a final API:

  * start/stop/step are deprecated in the initialization of Analysis classes.
    These parameters should instead be given to the run() method of the class.
  * Almost all "save()", "save_results()", "save_table()" methods in
    analysis classes.
  * Deprecated use of core.flags, the deprecation messages for this give advice
    on how to replace this functionality.

## Author statistics

Altogether this represents the work of 16 contributors from around the world,
and featured the work of 5 new contributors:
 - [Irfan Alibay][]
 - [Shujie Fan][]
 - [Andrew R. McCluskey][]
 - [Henry Mull][]
 - [Paul Smith][]


## Upgrading to MDAnalysis version 0.19

To get all these features run either `conda update -c conda-forge mdanalysis`
or `pip install --upgrade MDAnalysis`.


[release notes]: {{ site.github.wiki }}/ReleaseNotes0190
[Irfan Alibar]: https://github.com/IAlibay
[Shujie Fan]: https://github.com/VOD555
[Andrew R. McCluskey]: https://github.com/arm61
[Henry Mull]: https://github.com/hfmull
[Paul Smith]: https://github.com/p-j-smith

