---
layout: post
title: Version 1
---

We are happy to release version 2.0.0 of MDAnalysis!

This is a new major version, and includes major API breaking changes in addition to a large number of updates and enhancements. This release concludes our current [roadmap][], an updated roadmap detailing our future steps will shortly be published.

This version supports Python 3.6 through to 3.9 on Windows (32- and 64-bit), MacOS, and Linux. It also offers preliminary support for ppc64le and ARM64, but does not currently support Apple M1 processors.

Support for legacy version of Python (e.g. 2.7 and 3.5) is only available in MDAnalysis 1.x releases.

## Upgrading to MDAnalysis version 2.0.0

To install with `conda` from the [conda-forge channel][] run

```bash
conda update -c conda-forge mdanalysis
```

To install from [PyPi][] with `pip` run

```bash
pip install --upgrade MDAnalysis
```

For more help with installation see the [installation instructions in the User Guide][].

## Notable new additions

There were many awesome contributions to MDAnalysis for version 2.0.0. Here we list a few notable example of these. For more information please see the [CHANGELOG][].

### RDKit converter

[Google Summer of Code][] student @cbouy implemented a new [RDKit converter][] which allows for seamless conversions from RDKit to MDAnalysis structures. See @cbouy's [GSoC RDKit report][] for more information.

It currently accurately converts 90% of chemical space (based on [ChEMBL27][]), but future changes will improve this.

### OpenMM converter

@ahy3nz implemented an [OpenMM converter][] which can read OpenMM objects directly into MDAnalysis.

### Universe serialization

[Google Summer of Code][] student @yuxuanzhuang implemented a means to serialize MDAnalysis.Universe objects, paving the way for [parallel analysis][]. See @yuxuanzhuang's [GSoC Universe serialization report][] for more information.

### Mean Square Displacement

@hmacdope implemented a new [Mean Square Displacement][] analysis class.

### Results class

@PicoCentauri implemented a [Results class][] to store results from analysis classes. This change streamlines the API for analysis classe and paves the way for a soon-to-be released command line interface for MDAnalysis.

### H5MD support

**NSF REU** student @edisj implemented both a [reader and writer for the H5MD format][].

### Bond-Angle-Torsion coordinates

@daveminh implemented a means to translate from Cartesian to [Bond-Angle-Torsion coordinates][].


## Important fixes

For a full list of bugfixes see the [CHANGELOG][]. The following are selected fixes that may have lead to wrong results depending on your use case.

### Core

- Fixes an issue where `select_atom`, AtomGroup.unique, ResidueGroup.unique, and SegmentGroup.unique did not sort the output atoms (Issues [#3364][] [#2977][])
- Fixes the sometimes wrong sorting of atoms into fragments when unwrapping (Issue [#3352][])
- AtomGroup.center now works correctly for compounds + unwrapping (Issue [#2984][])

### File formats

- Fixes support for DL_POLY HISTORY files that contain cell information even if there are no periodic boundary conditions (Issue [#3314][])
- PDBWriter will use chainID instead of segID (Issue [#3144][])
- PDBParser and PDBWriter now assign and use the element attribute (Issues [#2422][] [#2423][])

### Analyses

- Fixes issue when attempting to use/pass mean positions to PCA analysis (Issue [#2728][])
- Fixes issue with WaterBridgeAnalysis double counting waters (Issue [#3119][])
- Documents and fixes the `density` keyword for `rdf.InterRDF_s` (Issue [#2811][])
- Fixed Janin analysis residue filtering, including CYSH (Issue [#2898][])

## Changes to functionality
- Deprecated `hbonds.hbond_analysis` has been removed in favour of `hydrogenbonds.hbond_analysis` (Issues [#2739][], [#2746][])
- TPRParser now loads TPR files with `tpr_resid_from_one=True` by default, which starts TPR resid indexing from 1 (instead of 0 as in previous MDAnalysis versions) (Issue [#2364][], PR [#3152][])
- `analysis.hole` has now been removed in favour of `analysis.hole2.hole` (Issue [#2739][])
- `Writer.write(Timestep)` and `Writer.write_next_timestep` have been removed. Please use `write()` instead (Issue [#2739][])
- Removes deprecated density_from_Universe, density_from_PDB, Bfactor2RMSF, and notwithin_coordinates_factory from MDAnalysis.analysis.density (Issue [#2739][])
- Removes deprecated `waterdynamics.HydrogenBondLifetimes` (PR [#2842][])
- `hbonds.WaterBridgeAnalysis` has been moved to `hydrogenbonds.WaterBridgeAnalysis` (Issue [#2739][] PR [#2913][])

## Deprecations
- The `bfactors` attribute is now aliased to `tempfactors` and will be removed in 3.0.0 (Issue [#1901][])
- `WaterBridgeAnalysis.generate_table()` now returns table information, with the `table` attribute being deprecated
- Various analysis result attributes which are now stored in `Results` will be deprecated in 3.0.0 (Issue [#3261][])
- In 3.0.0 the ParmEd classes will only be accessible from the `MDAnalysis.converters` module
- In 2.1.0 the TRZReader will default to a dt of 1.0 ps when failing to read it from the input TRZ trajectory

## Author statistics

Altogether, this represents the work of 35 authors. 17 of which were new contributors:

 - @daveminh
 - @mieczyslaw
 - @aditya-kamath
 - @tirkarthi
 - @LeonardoBarneschi
 - @hejamu
 - @biogen98
 - @orioncohen
 - @z3y50n
 - @hp115
 - @ojeda-e
 - @thadanipaarth
 - @HenryKobin
 - @1ut
 - @sulays
 - @ahy3nz
 - @fiszczyp

MDAnalysis thanks [NumFOCUS][]'s continued support as the organisation's fiscal sponsor.

- The MDAnalysis Team

[roadmap]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2019-11-06-roadmap %}
[conda-forge channel]: https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/mdanalysis
[PyPi]: https://pypi.org/project/MDAnalysis/
[installation instructions in the User Guide]: https://userguide.mdanalysis.org/stable/installation.html
[CHANGELOG]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/blob/release-2.0.0/package/CHANGELOG
[Google Summer of Code]: https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/
[RDKit converter]: https://docs.mdanalysis.org/2.0.0/documentation_pages/converters/RDKit.html
[ChEMBL27]: https://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/chembl/ChEMBLdb/releases/chembl_27/
[OpenMM converter]: https://docs.mdanalysis.org/2.0.0/documentation_pages/converters/OpenMM.html
[parallel analysis]: https://userguide.mdanalysis.org/stable/examples/analysis/custom_parallel_analysis.html
[Mean Square Displacement]: https://docs.mdanalysis.org/2.0.0/documentation_pages/analysis/msd.html
[Results class]: https://docs.mdanalysis.org/2.0.0/documentation_pages/analysis/base.html#MDAnalysis.analysis.base.Results
[reader and writer for the H5MD format]: https://docs.mdanalysis.org/2.0.0/documentation_pages/coordinates/H5MD.html
[Bond-Angle-Torsion coordinates]: https://docs.mdanalysis.org/2.0.0/documentation_pages/analysis/bat.html
[NumFOCUS]: https://www.numfocus.org
[GSoC RDKit report]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2020-08-29-gsoc-report-cbouy.md %}
[GSoC Universe serialization report]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2020-08-31-final-report-yuxuan.md %}
[#3364]: {{ site.github.issues }}/3364
[#2977]: {{ site.github.issues }}/2977
[#3352]: {{ site.github.issues }}/3352
[#2984]: {{ site.github.issues }}/2984
[#3314]: {{ site.github.issues }}/3314
[#3144]: {{ site.github.issues }}/3144
[#2422]: {{ site.github.issues }}/2422
[#2423]: {{ site.github.issues }}/2423
[#2728]: {{ site.github.issues }}/2728
[#3119]: {{ site.github.issues }}/3119
[#2811]: {{ site.github.issues }}/2811
[#2898]: {{ site.github.issues }}/2898
[#2739]: {{ site.github.issues }}/2739
[#2746]: {{ site.github.issues }}/2746
[#2364]: {{ site.github.issues }}/2364
[#3152]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/pull/3152
[#2842]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/pull/2842
[#2913]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/pull/2913
[#1901]: {{ site.github.issues }}/1901
[#3261]: {{ site.github.issues }}/3261
