---
layout: post
title: Release 1.0.0, 1.0.1, 1.1.1
---

A new release of MDAnalysis now available!
Or rather, three releases have been made for the 1.x version of MDAnalysis, so we just talk about all of them in a single post.


This version brings a multitude of **fixes**, [**deprecations**](#deprecations), and **new features**.
Some highlights are given below, whilst the release notes(someone make this a link to the right place please) list all the changes in this version.

This release completes, albeit with a small delay, the first phase of our [roadmap][]. It is the last version which will support python 2.7 and 3.5. Our next release, 2.0.0, which will be made available soon, will include major API changes and will support python 3.6+

## GSoC? 

## Notable new additions

- FHI-AIMS reader? NAMD binary coordinate format? ITPParser?
- ParmEd and Chemfiles converters?
- PCA changes?
- AnalysisBase refactors? (DensityAnalysis, etc..)?
- Improved selections?
- New hbond code? (w/ correlation module)
- get_connections (PR #3160)

## New support for 32 bit Windows?

- Add some blurb here

## Notable improvements

- Element parsing in PDB and XYZ files?
- TPR parser -> GMX 2020?
- New contacts radius_cut_q method?
- tqdm?

## Miscellaneous performance improvements

- Ramachandran? (PR #2706)
- TPR file reading? (PR #2804)

## Deprecations

This release brings severals deprecations as the package heads towards version 2.0.0.

The following parts of the analysis code will be removed/changed in version 2.0.0:
- analysis.hole is deprecated in favor of analysis.hole2.
- analysis.hbonds.HydrogenBondsAnalysis is deprecated in favor of analysis.hydrogenbonds.hbond_analysis.
- analysis.density.density_from_Universe() is deprecated in favor of analysis.density.DensityAnalysis.
- The notwithin_coordinates_factory() and density_from_PDB() methods of analysis.density are deprecated.
- analysis.waterdynamics.HydrogenBondLifetimes is deprecated in favor of analysis.hydrogenbonds.hbond_analysis.HydrogenBondAnalysis.lifetime() (to be implemented in version 2.0.0)
- analysis.leaflets.LeafletFinder() will no longer accept a filename, in 2.0.0 only Universes will be supported as inputs.
- analysis.helanal is deprecated and will be replaced by analysis.helix_analysis in 2.0.0.
- analysis.hbonds.WaterBridgeAnalysis will be moved to analysis.hydrogenbonds.WaterBridgeAnalysis.


The following parts of the readers/writers will be removed/changed in version 2.0.0:
- Writer.write_next_timestep() is deprecated in favor of Writer.write().
- Passing Timestep objects to Writer.write() is deprecated. In 2.0.0 only Universe or AtomGroup objects will be accepted.
- The way in which the NCDFWriter handles scale factos will change in version 2.x (see Issue #2327 for more details).
- When writing PDB files, MDAnalysis will no longer be using the last letter of the SegID to set the chainID in version 2.0.0.
- The bfactors and tempfactors attributes (set by the PDB and MMTF parsers respectively), will be aliased in version 2.0.0.
- When parsing TPR files, resids will be indexed from 1 rather than the current default of 0.

The following part of the core and library components will be removed/changed in version 2.0.0:
- lib.log.echo() is deprecated in favor of the new lig.log.ProgressBar.
- core.universe.as_Universe() is deprecated.

## Author statistics

Altogether this represents the work of 42 contributors from around the world,
and featured the work of 25 new contributors:
Note: here is a list of all the new contributors' github handles, can someone please convert this to a list with their names and a link to their github profiles? i.e.:
 - [Irfan Alibay][]
New contributor list:
 - bdice
 - joaomcteixeira
 - CCook96,
 - Yuan-Yu,
 - HTian1997,
 - Iv-Hristov,
 - hmacdope,
 - AnshulAngaria,
 - ss62171,
 - Luthaf,
 - yuxuanzhuang,
 - abhishandy,
 - mlnance,
 - shfrz,
 - wvandertoorn,
 - cbouy,
 - AmeyaHarmalkar,
 - Oscuro-Phoenix,
 - andrrizzi,
 - WG150,
 - Marcello-Sega,
 - calcraven,
 - ianmkenney,
 - rcrehuet,
 - hanatok

## Upgrading to MDAnalysis version 1.1.1

To get all these features run either `conda update -c conda-forge mdanalysis`
or `pip install --upgrade MDAnalysis`.

— The MDAnalysis Team

[roadmap]: {{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2019-11-06-roadmap %}
[Irfan Alibay]: https://github.com/IAlibay

