---
layout: post
title: MDAnalysis 2.1 is out
---

Six months after the 2.0 release, we are happy to release the version 2.1.0 of MDAnalysis!

With this version, we try to release new version more often. We also aim to follow [NEP 29][] that recommands what version of python and numpy to support. MDAnalysis 2.1.0 supports python 3.7 to 3.10 and requires numpy 1.18.0 at the minimum. This means our support window is still a bit larger than the recommendations, but expect that window to skink in the future as supporting older version of python and numpy has a cost both in terms of time and opportunities.

## Upgrading to MDAnalysis version 2.1.0

To install with `conda` from the [conda-forge channel][] run

```bash
conda update -c conda-forge mdanalysis
```

To install from [PyPi][] with `pip` run

```bash
pip install --upgrade MDAnalysis
```

For more help with installation see the [installation instructions in the User Guide][].


## Notable new additions

### Dielectric constant analysis

[Mattia Felice Palermo][] and [Philip Loche][] contributed a new analysis module to compute average dipole moments. The module can be accessed as [`MDAnalysis.analysis.dielectric`][]. Here is an example from the documentations:

```python
import MDAnalysis as mda
from MDAnalysis.analysis.dielectric import DielectricConstant
from MDAnalysisTests.datafiles import PSF_TRICLINIC, DCD_TRICLINIC

# Load a pure water system
universe = mda.Universe(PSF_TRICLINIC, DCD_TRICLINIC)

diel = DielectricConstant(universe.atoms)
diel.run()
print(diel.results)
```

```
{'M': array([ 1.54082059, -2.03885814,  3.37261771]), 'M2': array([ 5.71970697, 13.45815613, 18.24527209]), 'fluct': array([3.34557887, 9.3012136 , 6.87072189]), 'eps': array([2.47772633, 5.10830197, 4.0347653 ]), 'eps_mean': 3.873597866567474}
```

### Other enhancements

Thanks to [Atharva Kulkarni][], [`MDAnalysis.units.convert`][] knows about milliseconds and microseconds. The function, as the name indicates, converts quantities from one unit to an other.


## Important fixes

For a full list of bugfixes see the [CHANGELOG][]. The following are selected fixes that may have lead to wrong results depending on your use case.

## Deprecations

## Author statistics

Altogether, this represents the work of 14 authors, 6 of which were new contributors:

- @melomcr
- @mdd31
- @scal444
- @edisj
- @Atharva7K
- @yangtcai

MDAnalysis thanks [NumFOCUS][]'s continued support as the organisation's fiscal sponsor.

- The MDAnalysis Team

[installation instructions in the User Guide]: https://userguide.mdanalysis.org/stable/installation.html
[NumFOCUS]: https://www.numfocus.org
[CHANGELOG]: https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/blob/release-2.1.0/package/CHANGELOG
[NEP 29]: https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0029-deprecation_policy.html
[Mattia Felice Palermo]: @mattiafelice-palermo
[Philip Loche]: @PicoCentury
[`MDAnalysis.units.convert`]: https://docs.mdanalysis.org/stable/documentation_pages/units.html?highlight=unit#MDAnalysis.units.convert
[Atharva Kulkarni]: @Atharva7K
