---
layout: post
title: MDAnalysis Adopts the NumFOCUS Code of Conduct
---

As part of our ongoing commitment to fostering an open, welcoming, and respectful community, the MDAnalysis project has updated its [Code of Conduct]({{ site.baseurl }}/conduct) and formally adopted the [NumFOCUS Code of Conduct][NF-conduct]. This replaces our previous Code of Conduct, which had been in place since 2017, and brings our community standards into alignment with those of our fiscal sponsor, [NumFOCUS][NF].

Our decision to adopt the NumFOCUS Code of Conduct was motivated by a desire to better serve our growing and diverse community through a process that is impartial, transparent, and sustainable. By aligning with NumFOCUS’s framework, all Code of Conduct reports are reviewed by the [NumFOCUS Code of Conduct Working Group][NF-WG], a team of trained responders who operate independently of the MDAnalysis team to ensure reports are reviewed, investigated, and advised upon with neutrality.

## What’s Covered in the Code of Conduct?

The full text of [our Code of Conduct]({{ site.baseurl }}/conduct) is available on our website.

The document outlines:
* **expected behavior**, such as respectful communications and inclusion of diverse perspectives;
* **unacceptable behavior**, including harassment and discrimination;
* **reporting procedures** and contact points for individuals who experience or witness potential conduct violations;
* **enforcement procedures**, namely, that the MDAnalysis Code of Conduct Committee is responsible for enforcement based on recommendations from the [NumFOCUS Code of Conduct Working Group][NF-WG].

The Code of Conduct applies to *all MDAnalysis project spaces* — including [GitHub]({{ site.github.repo }}) and [GitHub Discussions]({{ site.mailinglists.discussion.url }}); [Discord]({{ site.discord.url }}); [LinkedIn]({{ site.linkedin.url }}); [Bluesky]({{ site.bluesky.url }}); workshops and events; and all other forums associated with MDAnalysis.

## Our Commitment

All [MDAnalysis core developers]({{ site.baseurl }}/pages/governance/#mdanalysis-core-developers) have unanimously agreed to adopt the new Code of Conduct and are fully committed to upholding its principles. Our goal is to ensure that the MDAnalysis community continues to be a place where all contributors, users, maintainers, and other community members feel welcomed, valued, and safe. As it takes *all of us*, and not just core developers, to foster an inclusive environment, all MDAnalysis community members agree to share a common set of core values and act according to these principles in all interactions within our community.

If you have any questions or concerns regarding the Code of Conduct, we encourage you to [reach out to the MDAnalysis Code of Conduct Committee][email]. We thank you for joining us on our mission to foster a welcoming and inclusive community!

— [@MDAnalysis/coredevs](https://github.com/orgs/MDAnalysis/teams/coredevs)

[NF-conduct]: https://numfocus.org/code-of-conduct
[NF]: https://numfocus.org/
[NF-WG]: https://numfocus.medium.com/meet-the-new-numfocus-code-of-conduct-working-group-a38b40f40fc3 
[email]: mailto:conduct@mdanalysis.org
